---
layout: post
title: Overview
excerpt_separator:  <!--more-->
---

This is the course website for PSYC 80103, Cognitive Technologies: From Theory and Data to Application, Spring 2018. Check this site for regular updates to course information.

Professor: Dr. Matthew Crump

- Lecture Friday, Time: 11:45am-1:45pm, Room: 6114 @ GC
- Office: 4307 James Hall
- Email: mcrump@brooklyn.cuny.edu
- Office hours: by appointment

|#|	Lecture Date|	Topic |	Assignment|
|:--|:--|:--|:--|:-- |:--|
|1|	2-Feb| Overview|tbd|
|2|	9-Feb|	Speeding Reading ||
|3|	16-Feb|	Brain Training ||
|4|	23-Feb| Appifying Education ||
|5|	2-Mar |	Detecting Liars ||
|6| 9-Mar	| Augmented Reality ||
|7| 16-Mar | Smart Spaces ||
|8| 23-Mar | Instance Theory ||
|9| W,11-Apr | Neural Networks & Machine Learning ||
|10| 13-Apr	| Object Recognition Systems ||
|11| 20-Apr	| Semantic Models ||
|12| 27-Apr	| Decoding Brain states ||
|13| 4-May	| Cognition on Drugs ||
|14| 11-May	| Big Data ||
|15| TBD	|Final Paper due||
|=====
{: rules="groups"}

# Required Readings

## 1. Overview


## 2. Speeding Reading

Written language is a technology people have developed to communicate ideas. What are the cognitive limits to the process of reading? Can they be expanded with new technology?

  - Rayner, K., Schotter, E. R., Masson, M. E., Potter, M. C., & Treiman, R. (2016). So Much to Read, So Little Time How Do We Read, and Can Speed Reading Help? *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 17,* 4–34.

  - Balota, D. A. (2016). Speed Reading: You Can’t Always Get What You Want, but Can You Sometimes Get What You Need? *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 17,* 1–3.

  - Benedetto, S., Carbone, A., Pedrotti, M., Le Fevre, K., Bey, L. A. Y., & Baccino, T. (2015). Rapid serial visual presentation in reading: The case of Spritz. *Computers in Human Behavior, 45,* 352–358.

### Links
  - [The Dotsies font](http://dotsies.org), a creative attempt to increase reading speed with a novel symbol system
  - [Alternative font systems](alternative alphabet systems)

## 3. Brain Training

Numerous websites and apps claim that users can enhance their cognitive skills by playing brain games. What does the data say?

  - Simons, D. J., Boot, W. R., Charness, N., Gathercole, S. E., Chabris, C. F., Hambrick, D. Z., & Stine-Morrow, E. A. L. (2016). Do “Brain-Training” Programs Work? *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 17,* 103–186.

  - McCabe, J. A., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2016). Brain-Training Pessimism, but Applied-Memory Optimism. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 17,* 187–191.

## 4. Appifying Education

How are cognitive principles and new tech being used to create *improved* educational resources and experiences?

  - Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan, M. J., & Willingham, D. T. (2013). Improving Students’ Learning With Effective Learning Techniques: Promising Directions From Cognitive and Educational Psychology. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 14,* 4–58.

  - Hirsh-Pasek, K., Zosh, J. M., Golinkoff, R. M., Gray, J. H., Robb, M. B., & Kaufman, J. (2015). Putting Education in “Educational” Apps: Lessons From the Science of Learning. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16,* 3–34.

  - Roediger, H. L. (2013). Applying Cognitive Psychology to Education: Translational Educational Science. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 14,* 1–3.

  - Wartella, E. (2015). Educational Apps: What We Do and Do Not Know. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 16,* 1–2.

## Detecting Liars

  - Loftus, E. F. (2010). Catching Liars. *Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 11,* 87–88.

  - Vrij, A., Granhag, P. A., & Porter, S. (2010). *Pitfalls and Opportunities in Nonverbal and Verbal Lie Detection. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 11,* 89–121.

## Augmented Reality

3-D headsets, google glasses, new phones, and more are capable of overlaying computer generated visuals on top of normal world as we see it. Is there any evidence this tech can augment cognition?

  - assigned reading TBD

## Smart Spaces

The objects and spaces in our lives are increasingly infused with computers and internet connections. What are the opportunities and consequences for cognition?

  - assigned reading TBD

## Instance Theory

We look at cognitive theories of memory proposing the instance (episodic representation) as a fundamental unit of cognition. This will set the stage for our following discussions of computational techniques for pattern classification that have been applied to solving problems in numerous domains.

  - Jacoby, L. L., & Brooks, L. R. (1984). Nonanalytic cognition: Memory, perception, and concept learning. Psychology of learning and motivation, 18, 1-47.
  - Hintzman, D. (1986). Schema abstraction in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 93, 411–428.

## Neural Networks

We do a short primer on neural networks and computational pattern classification techniques.

### Links

[https://jalammar.github.io/visual-interactive-guide-basics-neural-networks/](https://jalammar.github.io/visual-interactive-guide-basics-neural-networks/)

## Object Recognition systems

Computer algorithms can now classify and identify many kinds of objects and patterns, which was a difficult problem only a number of years ago. We look at some examples.


## Semantic Models

Relatively simple learning models trained on large corpuses of texts (e.g., digitized books) can become sensitive to the semantic meaning of words. These models project words into a geometric space, such that the distance between words represents their semantic similarity. The models offer both a theory of human semantics, and technology for semantics processing and classification.

  - Johns, B. T., Taler, V., Pisoni, D. B., Farlow, M. R., Hake, A. M., Kareken, D. A., … Johns, B. (2017). Cognitive Modeling as an Interface Between Brain and Behavior: Measuring the Semantic Decline in Mild Cognitive Impairment. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology= Revue Canadienne de Psychologie Experimentale. Retrieved from http://btjohns.com/pubs/JTPFHKUJ_CJEP_2017.pdf
  - Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. (2007). Representing word meaning and order information in a composite holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114, 1.
  - Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (1998). An introduction to latent semantic analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 259–284.


## Decoding Brain States

The same pattern classification algorithms that can be used to classify faces or other objects, can also be used to classify and decode brain states. We look at a few compelling examples.

  - Horikawa, T., Tamaki, M., Miyawaki, Y., & Kamitani, Y. (2013). Neural decoding of visual imagery during sleep. Science, 340, 639–642.
  - Cowen, A. S., Chun, M. M., & Kuhl, B. A. (2014). Neural portraits of perception: reconstructing face images from evoked brain activity. Neuroimage, 94, 12–22.


## Cognition on drugs

What does current drug research tell us about enhancing aspects of cognition?

  - Mehlman, M. J. (2004). Cognition‐Enhancing Drugs. The milbank quarterly, 82(3), 483-506.
  - Greely, H., Sahakian, B., Harris, J., Kessler, R. C., Gazzaniga, M., Campbell, P., & Farah, M. J. (2008). Towards responsible use of cognitive-enhancing drugs by the healthy. Nature, 456(7223), 702-705.

## Big Data

What is the intersection between cognitive research and the growing interest in big data?

  -assigned reading TBD
